What's a fecal transplant? You take a
healthy person's poop and you transfer
it into the person who's sick. For
example, a patient of mine took an
antibiotic which wipes out your gut,
which became life-threatening. Our
choices were to remove the colon or to
give her a fecal transplant. And so, I
delivered the fecal transplant to her.
By the next day, the entire infectious
issue got shut down. So, this is a great
example to show how important our gut
microbiome is because 60% of the weight
of your stool is your microbiome.
Really? Yes. but it's not getting enough
attention and we need to talk about
that.
>> Worldrenowned gastroenterenterologist
Dr. Will Bolich is back.
>> This time he's sharing brand new
information regarding the gut microbiome
>> and how poo might actually be the key to
your health.
>> 60% of people that listen are currently
struggling with some kind of gut problem
and it manifests in these subtle ways
like bloating, [music] increased
fatigue, difficulty concentrating, you
don't sleep well at night, skin issues.
So it flies under the radar but
ultimately leads to other health related
problems afterwards.
>> So I've got so many questions.
>> Totally.
>> What's the cause of bloating?
>> So constipation is the number one cause.
But people who are bloated, please don't
sip through straws, drink carbonated
drinks, chew on gum, because you just
make it worse.
>> Next. Are there decisions that you make
as a parent that will have a lasting
impact on a kid's gut function?
>> Yeah. By 3 years of age, you are
basically fully adult-sized in terms of
your microbiome. But antibiotics, bottle
feeding, and birth by cescareian section
are associated with an impact on the
microbiome, such as an increased risk of
allergic, autoimmune, and metabolic
diseases. And I'll explain why.
>> And then, can I repair the gut?
>> Yeah, 100%. And every 3 to 5 days, you
build a new gut barrier. And so, I've
identified four things missing in our
diet, as well as a daily routine that
can optimize our microbiome. And when
you [music] do these, you will thrive
and you will live longer and you will
have less disease. And I'm going to take
you through all of these steps right
now.
>> I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So yeah thank
you [music]
Dr. Will. Before we started the
recording I asked you about this new
book that you've written and the way
that you spoke about it was incredibly
passionate.
Why? I I sincerely believe that if
people take the advice that's in this
book and they actually follow it, which
is the hardest part. I'm completely
convinced it will transform your life.
And that's because we all are struggling
with the same problem. We manifest it in
different ways, but there's this common
issue which is inflammation.
And it's the health story of our time.
It's not getting enough attention. And
this book is not only about shining the
light on that. It's about providing
people with the evidence-based tools
that they need in order to be successful
and to live an anti-inflammatory life.
And when you do that, you will thrive
and you will live longer and you will
have less disease.
>> Can you explain inflammation to me like
I'm a 10-year-old?
>> Steve, you have an immune system that
protects your body. Mhm.
>> And inflammation is when we turn that
immune system on and we make it active.
And sometimes that's a good thing,
right? If you had a if you had a tummy
bug, you want to clear that infection,
right? If you hurt yourself, you want to
heal that wound. That's when your immune
system is really good. It's working for
you. But the problem that we have these
days is that we're turning on the immune
system when we don't need to. And it's
staying on 24 hours a day, seven days a
week.
And that ultimately creates problems
because it leads to new issues, new
health conditions.
>> The word inflammation sounds like
something has inflated or become
swollen.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, that is a part of the process. For
example, if you hurt your knee, right,
there there will be inflammation in your
knee and it will get red, it will get
swollen, it will become tender and like
those are the typical characteristics of
inflammation when it arrives. But what
we're talking about is chronic low-grade
inflammation. And this is a tricky thing
because it can fly below the radar. It
can fly below the radar where you don't
realize that it's there. Your doctor may
not realize that it's there. And it's
and it manifests in these subtle ways
where it's like you have increased
fatigue. You have difficulty
concentrating. You don't sleep well at
night. You wake up with aches and pains
or you have joints that hurt a little
bit or you've had skin issues, right?
And it's like, well, we all have those
problems, but that's inflammation.
Inflammation is driving many of those
issues. And so, it's important for
people to be aware that, you know, you
may like these. There's so many patients
that go to their doctor complaining of
these symptoms. And the doctor's kind of
not really sure what to do about that.
And I think it's time for us to like
open our mind and bring awareness to the
possibility that there is this issue
inflammation that's driving that
problem, the symptoms, the health
conditions of which there are many. And
ultimately, we need a plan to address
that.
>> And is can you be like skinny and in
shape and still have inflammation?
>> 100%.
>> So it's not just a a weight thing. No,
it's not just a weight thing because if
you if you think about, you know, people
who are competitive bodybuilders, they
look amazing on the outside and they're
falling apart on the inside. And these
people often suffer with digestive
health problems. I know because they
reach out to me, including many people
that are wellknown who look incredible
and they're suffering with gut issues
and then ultimately they're at risk for
other health related problems
afterwards. So on this point of
inflammation is when your immune system
kind of stays on. Why does it stay on
[clears throat]
and uh I mean how do I turn it off?
>> Well, we we have to start with uh
acknowledging that the reason why this
causes problems is that it let's like
sort of use an analogy of the immune
system is your small army and they're
there to defend you. And when we
activate the army and they're actually
going to war, you have to expect that
there's going to be damage to the
surrounding areas,
>> right? Like [clears throat] if people if
if there's a war occurring, of course
there's decimation and damage that
occurs and it's brutal. And the problem
is that if we're activating the immune
system, the the areas that are
surrounding it, that's your body, right?
And the decimation and destruction
that's occurring is within your own
tissues, within your organs. As I was
researching this book, I I I actually
took three years to understand this
topic. And what I discovered is a
connection between your immune system
and your gut that is undeniable.
And that connection becomes the powerful
fa factor that allows you to understand
why it happens and how we can fix it. We
have uh our gut microbiome and there are
38 trillion microbes that live inside of
our large intestine
and they include bacteria and yeasts and
and archa which are these things that
have been on the planet for 4 billion
years and possibly parasites. And so in
this entire community of microorganisms,
they're there with a purpose and that is
to support you and your physiology. One
of their key jobs is actually to uh
basically feed the gut barrier that
lines your entire intestines.
>> Do you want to show me on using this?
>> Sure.
>> Is this a the right part of the body?
>> So now the large intestine
um is the home to your microbiome. So
these 38 trillion microbes this is their
this is their residence. This is their
domain where they live. Now this entire
system which is like on the order of 20
or 25 feet so like something on the
range of 6 to 8 mters
it's coated with a single layer of cells
which we call the epithelial layer and
that is your gut barrier and it's a
quite fascinating part of your body
because this is like the castle wall and
keeps the bad stuff out but
simultaneously needs to allow the good
stuff in and These cells they turn over
every 3 to 5 days. So it's a beautiful
thing actually because every 3 to 5 days
you have an opportunity to create a
brand new gut barrier. So within the
system the microbes that live inside
your colon their job is to basically
repair and restore the gut barrier. And
when the gut barrier is intact
it's going to do its job of protecting
the immune system.
And when the gut barrier starts to break
down, then things can sneak across
which we would refer to as increased
intestinal permeability, but the common
language is leaky gut. The immune system
will see and recognize things that
aren't supposed to be there. And so the
immune system then steps up and wants to
take it out. And that basically means it
needs to get activated and attack.
And that is inflammation.
So the breakdown of these three systems
that start with the microbes, microbes
are actually your first layer of defense
and then leading to the breakdown of the
gut barrier is what ultimately activates
the immune system when we have things
that are sneaking across that are not
supposed to be there. the reverse can
also be true. And that to me is where
the exciting opportunity exists is that
if you can heal the gut microbes, then
the gut microbes can get back to work
and do their job of repairing and
restoring the gut barrier. And when you
create a strong gut barrier, then
basically you're protecting the immune
system. And then what you see actually
is the immune system cools off and it
becomes more tactical and capable of
doing its job.
>> Okay? And when we're eating lots of bad
stuff and you know many of the things
we're going to talk about today are
causing a breakdown in those microbes
which is causing the gut barrier to
worsen which is causing the immune
system to kick in which is causing the
inflammation and the inflammation is
therefore causing our cells to be
damaged. What's the immune system
overfunctioning causing?
Like you you're talking about the army
analogy where there's an army and
they're at war and some of them are
damaging the surroundings.
>> How is it damaging my surroundings? My
immune system being on all the time.
Well, so what ends up happening is it
sets off this sort of chain reaction
which can have an effect throughout your
entire body where the immune cells, it's
not just a couple of immune cells, they
start to basically send out signals and
these signals we call them cytoines. So
you can measure those cytoines and those
are basically communication tools that
the immune cells are using with each
other to basically call for help. So and
as they get revved up these cytoines
start to go out and then this leads to a
cascade of even more immune cells
releasing even more cytoines. And so and
then kick off this wave and this is what
ultimately you can feel throughout your
entire body. um and it and it has these
consequences of basically causing damage
to these individual tissues. So it
depends on which tissue we're referring
to. Inflammation in the liver we would
call hepatitis, right? But at the same
time we have overwhelming evidence at
this point that inflammation in the
brain which we call neuroinflammation
has been associated with mood disorders.
So like major depression inflammation in
the brain has been associated with
cognitive disorders like Alzheimer's
disease, Parkinson's disease. So, and
it's not to claim it's not to claim that
all disease
literally is related or caused by the
gut microbiome. That's not the call.
It's more so to say that we need to
understand that our immune system is so
powerfully connected to our microbiome
that you cannot separate the two. And
there's evidence to suggest that we can
we can manipulate. So whether it be
antibiotics which decimate the gut or
the alternative the the opposite would
be a fecal transplant which rapidly
reinvigorates the gut and restores that
gut architecture and ecosystem.
>> What's a fecal transplant?
>> So fecal transplant is where you take a
healthy person's poop and you transfer
it into the person who's sick.
>> And where are they administering it?
>> The way that I've always done the fecal
transplant because I've done many
throughout my career is during a
colonoscopy.
So if in theory
>> colonoscopy what's a colonoscopy?
>> Yeah. So colonoscopy is is a medical
procedure where typically you would be
asleep and while you're asleep I take a
long flexible tube that is about the
size of my index finger and I can pass
that with control
all the way through the entirety of your
large intestine which is about five or
six feet long. And I can actually dip
into the last part of the small
intestine which we call the terminal
illium which is down here in the right
the right lower part of the abdomen.
You're administering the fecal
transplant because they they have this
vicious infection called CDEF
and and again those infections this
infection can be life-threatening. And
you're administering the fecal
transplant because the antibiotics are
not working. So you need an alternative
where the idea and goal is to restore
balance within the gut ecosystem.
>> Yeah. You're putting good bacteria in,
not taking bad bacteria. Yeah.
>> Not taking all bacteria out, I guess.
>> So you put and you put the good bacteria
in and when this happens, you're
actually all at once reinstalling
potentially hundreds of species
in balance in the right amounts. So,
it's like an entire ecosystem
transplant. It would be like us being
like, "Okay, uh here's this forest
that's not doing well. We're going to
take the Amazon and we're going to
transplant it into the space." And now
that we have all these animals that like
do well in the space, the forest is
washing. It's vibrant again. So, going
back to our point about the immune
system, the reason why the immune system
is staying on is because I have damaged
my gut and it's essentially trying to
repair my gut. And so if I live in a
permanent state of a damaged gut because
of what I'm consuming, then I'm going to
live in a permanent state theoretically
of inflammation. The thesis from my
perspective is that the modern world and
the way in which we live is damaging our
gut, damaging our microbiome, and then
we're suffering the consequence of that
which is disruption of our gut barrier
and ultimately the activation of our
immune system in this forever war, which
is chronic great inflammation.
How was cancer associated with this? We
you talked about 130 different diseases
and in your book I think it's around
page 22 you mentioned I think it's
chemotherapy where you're making an
analogy between how chemotherapy kind of
wipes everything out and how a poorly
kept gut is associated with an increase
in cancer likelihoods.
Let's start with this. Your body
produces 3.8 million cells every second.
Your immune system has the
responsibility of identifying where
there's a problem and taking it out. You
can't possibly create 3.8 million new
cells and not have some genetic
abnormality that could turn into cancer.
Right? So, the responsibility of the
immune system is to basically be perfect
every day of your life and remove those
problematic cells before they turn into
something bigger and better.
It's an impossible task. There's an
entire story that's unfolding now in
this conversation about how the gut
microbiome is connected to our immune
system and the way in which we treat
cancer and it's it started really in
melanoma. We have been using sort of
immune manipulations for a very long
time to treat melanoma. But what changed
is they were using these things called
amunotherapy.
To be more specific, immune checkpoint
inhibitors. So it turns out that your
immune cells have like basically a kill
switch. If there was a problem, you
could like flip it off immediately.
And that specific receptor is called
PD1. And the tumors,
they're so nasty because they produce
this protein that basically activates
the kill switch,
>> turns off your immune system,
>> and it turns off your immune system.
So the immune checkpoint inhibitor, the
idea is to basically flip that switch
back on. And by flipping it on, activate
your immune system, which will then wake
up, see this cancer, be like, okay, that
needs to be taken out, and go after it.
If someone received antibiotics before
the immune checkpoint inhibitor, they
didn't do well. So then it raised the
question, maybe this is a microbiome
thing. So they said, okay, well, if
antibiotics do this, what happens if we
move in the opposite direction and
basically act like restore the
microbiome with a fecal transplant? And
what they discovered was incredible
results. There's now multiple studies in
melanoma where they take people and they
give them a fecal transplant from
someone who was a responder
and give it to the person who's about to
go get treated. And that's what they
did. And and with incredible results,
like literally twice as many people were
beating cancer relative to the
expectation. The fascinating thing about
that is that it's not just a cancer
story. There's research now in
Parkinson's disease. So Parkinson's
disease is a neurocognitive disorder. So
that means basically it's a it's a brain
condition.
>> Mhm.
>> Well, it turns out
that Parkinson's
probably starts in the gut and this is
actually a disorder of the gut brain
connection because both parts are
involved. It's not just the brain
condition. The brain condition is
actually
the more severe part. So
for the people who are listening at
home, we have a model out and I have
just lifted their skull like uh Hannibal
Lectar and exposed their brain tissue.
And what we want to talk about is the
brain gut connection, the connections
between the brain and their intestines.
And so we have classically thought of
Parkinson's disease as being a brain a
brain health problem. But I'm here to
tell you that this problem begins down
here in the gut and involves the
connections between the two because
every single person that I've ever seen
with Parkinson's disease, they're
constipated.
All of them.
And what's interesting is that they've
now shown that the constipation
comes before the Parkinson's disease. So
now this doesn't mean for people who are
constipated, there's a lot of you out
there. This doesn't mean that if you're
constipated, you're going to develop
Parkinson's disease. There's a very
small percentage of people, but it's
important to understand that the the
manifestations of this health condition
actually start in the digestive system
before they actually transfer up to the
brain. And so now in this study, Steve,
what they did is they took these people
who have Parkinson's disease. They gave
them a fecal transplant.
>> They gave them a poo transplant.
>> They gave them a poo transplant. And
what they found was a year later
they had a durable continued benefit in
terms of their movement issues.
There are now other studies with
Parkinson's disease that are showing
benefit both for the brain and the
symptoms of Parkinson's disease, but
also for the gut in terms of that
constipation that I was talking about. I
mean, it begs the question, these poo
transplants sound great.
>> Can the average person go and get one?
>> I think we need to talk about that.
>> Yeah, we need to talk about that because
there was a Netflix special where they
made it sound like uh you should just do
it at home. Do not do that. Please do
not do that. So, number one, we need to
study and adequately understand what the
risks are. The the fecal transplant
makes it sound like this is like the
quick easy thing that you do and you fix
your entire life, but that's not the
same as rebuilding your microbiome using
the lifestyle and diet tools that
actually are going to give you the
meaningful health impact that you're
searching for
>> over the long term.
>> Over the long term, a huge percentage of
the population struggle with gut
problems. We asked the D of aio audience
and uh roughly it was over 60% of people
that listen said that they're currently
struggling with some kind of gut problem
whether it's bloating or some kind of
discomfort or just digestion issues
generally.
Now that's 61% of people responding to
those three words bloating, discomfort,
irregular digestion. Then about 15% of
people said that they have IBS. Like 14
15% of people said self diagnose that
they think they have irritable bowel
syndrome. [clears throat]
Am I right in thinking
the causes of what they're saying they
have are wildly different potentially?
Or is it like one or two things? Cuz I'm
trying to figure out how I help those
61% of people that like me have eat
something sometimes and then feel
and then not really sure what it is,
feel a little bit bloated, might feel a
bit gassy, um might have strange
digestion, but not necessarily sure
what's causing it and when. Yeah, I mean
this is the same issue that I struggle
with, right? So I I I write a book with
the goal of trying to help as many
people as possible knowing that you
can't there's no one-sizefits-all,
right? So ultimately it's about
empowering people with the right
information and helping them to
identify. I literally wrote about this
in my author's note right in the front
of the book, which is basically to say
you're all going to read the same book,
but the way in which this book touches
you is going to be unique to you.
There's going to be something in there
that you're going to find that you're
like, that's my moment. That's my aha
moment, right? And for many people, like
just looking statistically, looking at
the average American diet, there's a
huge opportunity when it comes to diet.
And that is where I put a lot of energy
and attention because I just I know what
the stats say. So, I know America needs
this. But at the same time, there's a
conversation that gets into other topics
that look, the way that we live is
different than the way that our
grandparents grew up when they were
kids.
>> Mhm. To me, it's more about like helping
people to see like what is that one
thing for them. There's some people who
are going to be listening to this that
it's not their diet, it's not sleep,
it's not circadian rhythm, it's trauma.
And I think that these are things that
need to like we need to shine a light on
that. We'll do all of that. On this
point about bloating, discomfort,
irregular digestion, if I have one of
those things, does that theoretically
mean that something is not right?
>> Everyone gets bloated once in a while.
So, I think I think it would be unfair
to make it sound like you should never
have any adverse symptoms at all.
>> Right.
>> But if it's prolonged,
>> but if it's prolonged, if it's a chronic
health issue, if you're the type of
person who you wake up in the morning
and you say, "I hope today is going to
be a good day. I hope I don't have to
deal with that specific issue." You you
have a problem like we already know. And
then we have to work on that to address
that issue. And how we go about that, I
think needs to be on some level
personalized.
But the tools that are at our disposal
remain the same. So it's just a matter
of like let's put it on the table. Here
are your choices. You pick which ones
are most applicable to you. Where are
the opportunities for you? And I I can't
tell you that without knowing more about
you.
>> What about this issue of people getting
gassy like farting a lot?
>> Yeah.
>> Is that typically associated with one
particular gut issue or is that again
could that be a plethora of issues?
>> So it could be it could be a plethora of
issues. This is this is a common
problem. If I have to like start with
what is my number one thing, it's
constipation for sure. 100%. There are
so many people who are listening right
now that are constipated and they don't
even know it because they poop every day
and they think that how often they poop
is the definition. And that's not true.
So constipation is what happens when
you're not adequately emptying your
bowels.
And that could be a frequency problem,
but it could also be that it's a partial
poop.
>> Oh, okay. Cuz I thought constipation was
if you just haven't been you can't go
you go to the toilet and nothing comes
out.
>> Look, don't get me wrong. If you if you
don't poop for a week, I know you're
constipated. I don't need to ask any
more questions. If you go a week, but if
it's there are people who they poop
every other day. That's their normal.
They feel fine. They don't have any gut
symptoms. They don't have a constipation
problem. We're okay.
>> Right? Right. So frequency is not the be
all and end all.
>> It's part of the it's part of the
equation, right? [clears throat] But
there's also people who they poop and I
I want to sort of paint the picture and
forgive me like I feel very comfortable
talking about poop. This is what I've
done for a living.
>> But they they go to the bathroom in the
morning. They struggle.
It's not satisfying. They had to work
really hard to get a little nugget to
come out. And then they feel like they
still have to go.
and maybe 45 minutes later they poop
again. Okay, that's not a new poop.
You're doing partial poops. You're
probably doing a 20 or 25% poop. So, you
could poop three, four times during the
day. You might not still be fully
emptying your bowels, right? And so that
so that's an example of a person who can
actually be struggling with bloating and
constipation and not think because
they're like, "Doc, I'm pooping three
times a day."
>> Where is the gas coming from in that?
Why why do people you eat something and
then you fart a lot? What's going on?
>> So gas so gas travels with poop. Um uh
you may I don't mean you specifically,
Steve, people listening may notice this
that you wake up in the morning and
you're farting like crazy. And that
farting continues until you actually
have your morning bowel movement. And
then once you have your good, healthy
morning bowel movement, you feel solid
and you're not farting anymore, right?
the gas travels with the poop. So, and
the reason why this happens is because
first of all, your poop is not just the
leftover remains of your food. Actually,
your poop is predominantly your
microbiome.
60% of the weight of your stool is
microbial.
>> Really?
>> Yes.
>> When you say microbial, you mean like
the bacteria?
>> The bacteria.
>> 60% of it.
>> Let me give you an example. If I took
your drink and I added some soluble
fiber, which is prebiotic, into your
drink.
>> Yeah.
>> There's no grit, there's no roughage,
you don't even know it's there. And
you're going to have a bigger, healthier
bowel movement tomorrow as a result of
what I just did. Why? Because I fed your
microbes and they grow stronger and then
they multiply. And because they
multiplied, you have a bigger bowel
movement,
>> right? That's the way that that works.
Now, don't get me wrong. You eat, you
know, a salad, you're going to end up
with a bigger bowel movement as well,
but a big part of that is the fiber
within that salad that's feeding these
microbes. They multiply, they grow, and
you have a big bowel movement.
>> So, if that was my if that was my my
store, my poop, I'm holding a chocolate
bar here. 60% of that would be the
microbes.
>> 60% of that would be the microbes. Yes.
So for that person when the poop is in
gridlock and it's not moving through
then those microbes are basically
sitting there with unlimited time to
ferment
and produce gas.
>> Okay?
>> So anything they come into contact with,
they're just going to start working on
it. So and it's not just like a fiber
thing. Anything they come into contact
with, it could be protein, they will
ferment it. They will produce gas. So,
this is a big part of the reason why
constipation is so strongly associated
with gas and bloating.
>> When people eat dairy and things like
that, and I think some people that have
gluten, they they often tend to get a
little bit gassy.
>> Yeah.
>> Is that constipation?
>> Gas and bloating is not just a
constipation issue. I would argue that
constipation is the number one cause of
that particular issue, but there's many
potential causes. Number one could be
motility. That's constipation.
>> What's motility?
>> Motility is the way in which your
intestines move. So if the intestines
move too fast and out of rhythm, you get
diarrhea. If the intestines slow down
too much, sluggish, you get
constipation. We want the intestines in
a rhythm because when they're in a
rhythm, just like your heart, that's
when they perform their best. So in a
rhythm basically means predictable,
consistent daily bowel movements. That's
ultimately where we would love to be,
right? And that in a way taps into like
an entire circadian conversation that we
can have later. This is a part of your
circadian rhythm is a fantastic morning
bowel movement. Motility is just one of
the causes of gas and bloating. The
second is the microbiome. If you have a
microbiome that's damaged and
struggling, it's not going to be able to
do its job the way it's supposed to. And
part of its job is processing and
breaking down fiber. Because the fiber
in our diet, we don't have the enzymes
to digest it. So, it works its way
through the intestines, comes into
contact with the microbes, and the
microbes, they have literally 60,000
enzymes that we don't have as humans.
They go to work as [snorts] teams. Fiber
stops being fiber, produces short- chain
fatty acids. This is the way that it's
supposed to work.
When your gut is not happy, they're
weak. the microbes are weak and you're
asking them to do work and they can't
handle that and you end up with sloppy
digestion and that's gas and bloating.
The third thing can be your diet. So you
just mentioned dairy which contains
lactose. Lactose can be easily fermented
to produce gas.
You mentioned gluten.
Gluten itself is a protein. So can
gluten technically be fermented? Yes, it
could be technically fermented, but
that's not really the that's not really
what's going on. What's happening is
that gluten containing foods, which are
wheat, barley, and rye,
also contain these carbohydrates called
fruans.
And fruans are actually really good for
our microbes. They're prebiotic.
But if you consume a very large amount
of them and you're not used to eating
these foods,
it can cause gas and bloating. these
days. When I was younger, if I had uh if
I had pasta, I was fine. If I have pasta
these days, I'm going to feel it for the
next like two two days.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. I don't know. And I don't even
know what's going on. But then other
people can eat pasta as much as they
want, it seems.
>> Out of curiosity, can you go to Italy
and eat pasta and be okay or no? Same
thing.
>> I haven't really not really tried. Um,
>> anecdotally, I think when I remove when
I have like nongluten
bread or non-gluten pasta, I I think I'm
I feel much better. But I but I'm well
aware from speaking to people like
yourself that such a small percentage of
the population is actually gluten
intolerant, but we all kind of think we
are to some degree. I think it's was
what's the the numbers? Is it like 20%
of people think they are or something?
So, like here in Los Angeles, it's um
like probably 80% of people
>> think that
>> well like almost everyone's gluten-free.
Yeah. Right.
>> Which
>> they don't need to be. And and actually
it can cause problems. It can it can
cause problems to be gluten-free unless
you know what adaptations to make.
>> So, what are you when you ask that
question about Italy, what are you
getting at? There's a processing issue
in the United States involving wheat,
which is that they allow the wheat to be
sprayed with glyphosate,
which is Roundup. It's a weed killer.
And you they do that to basically dry it
out as quickly as possible. So, imagine
for a moment that you're a farmer, and
you have this this field of wheat. You
harvest it. Okay, here are your choices,
Steve. You can wait a couple weeks and
let it dry out naturally in the air and
and store it somewhere or you can spray
it with this chemical and it will be dry
by tomorrow and then you can chip it up.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And the problem is that
glyphosate is not on the label. You
would never know whether it's sprayed or
not sprayed unless you're buying
organic. If you buy organic, then by
definition they're not allowed to spray
it.
You would never know if it's there. The
the the thing about glyphosate is that
it's been approved
to exist in our food system under the
assumption of safety
because what it does is it shuts down
this thing called the Schikim pathway
and that kills weeds or it kills plants
and we have a workaround and it has to
do with basically amino acids. We have a
workaround where we can basically create
those amino acids as humans,
but the plants can't. So the plants die,
we live. But there's a problem, which is
that the microbes
that live inside of our large intestine,
they don't have the workaround.
So that microscopic amount of
glyphosate, you would say, well, us big
humans, that's so small. Yeah. But what
do you think happens when it comes into
contact with them?
We know that glyphosate disrupts the
microbiome,
that it depletes the beneficial
bacteria,
and the ones that tolerate it the best
are the inflammatory ones,
>> the bad bacteria.
>> The bad bacteria. So, you're shifting
the balance. And this is this is a small
thing, but I hear from people, Steve,
that go to Italy, they say, "I can't eat
wheat in the United States." And then
they go to Italy and they're fine. And
you think it's that glyphosate.
>> Yeah. They don't do that there.
>> So if I tried I'll try organic pasta
tonight
and maybe that'll be better.
>> Yes. And then like the alternative
choice is how do you do with bread? Are
you okay?
>> Uh not all bread. My my generally I stay
away from bread.
>> Okay. Do you ever eat sourdough?
>> Yeah.
>> Do you do okay with sourdough?
>> There we go. So here's here's the second
part of this equation. Put the
glyphosate. Put that to the side for a
moment. Let's talk about the fruans that
we were talking about a moment ago.
>> When you ferment your uh your wheat,
when you ferment your dough, you
actually reduce the frucan content.
>> What's fru?
>> So these are the the longchain
carbohydrates
that exist in wheat, barley, and rice.
So if it contains gluten, it also
contains these fruans. Like gluten is
not the only thing in wheat, right? And
these fruans, again, they're good for
you. They're good for your microbiome.
But people who have a slightly damaged
gut, they struggle to process and digest
them. So this would explain why some
people they eat they eat, you know,
wheat containing, gluten containing
foods and they struggle, but they do
okay with sourdough because if you
ferment the the bread, it takes it
reduces the frucine content and actually
then you can tolerate it.
>> Oh, okay. So you think it might be the
fruine in the bread that I have an issue
with and sourdough doesn't have fruine
in it. Yeah, there was there was a study
that was in gastronurology a few years
ago. G gastronurology is the top journal
in my field where basically they they
sent people home with a bunch of
breakfast bars. All right, not
chocolate, but nonetheless, they sent
people home with a bunch of breakfast
bars, three of them. One of them was a
placebo bar, so they didn't add anything
special. One of them contained a very
large concentration of gluten
and then the third one contained the
frucans.
And the placebo is our standard. We're
going to compare to that. When people
ate the gluten containing bar, and these
were, by the way, people that um they
did not have celiac disease, they did
have gluten problems according to them,
right? So like this is like the 20% of
people that you mentioned a moment ago
who think they might have a gluten
problem. When they ate the gluten
containing bar,
they actually had less symptoms
than the placebo.
So in other words, the gluten is not the
problem.
But when they ate the fruc containing
bar,
they were triggered.
So basically what this said is that we
have been taking this concept of gluten
intolerance and we've we've misnamed it.
It's not a gluten intolerance, it's a
fruine intolerance. These are people who
are tending to struggle with these
particular parts of that food. What
foods contain fruine? So, uh, wheat,
barley, and rye,
>> okay?
>> And different there's there's many
different types of fruans, by the way.
So, you may not react to all of them.
You may react to just some of them,
>> but like garlic and onions are also
classic. So, you hear people who are
like, I can't eat garlic. I feel it's
horrible. Right? That's a that can be a
fru issue. Te, amaranth, sorghum,
um, quinoa. These are these are whole
grains that don't contain gluten and
they also don't contain frucans.
>> How long does it take to repair the gut
when you have done damage to it? That's
a very broad question intentionally, but
generally for the average person who's
done who sort of irritated their gut,
how long does it take to restore and for
those microbes to go back? It really
depends. You have to start with, okay,
what's your starting point, right? Like
how deep is the damage? How bad is it?
Because for the people who have
ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease,
those are forms of inflammatory bowel
disease.
Those people have the deepest dis
dispiosis. Dispiosis is the word that we
use for a damaged gut. Is it possible to
reverse that?
>> Um, it's possible to put them into
remission
so deeply that they don't have a flare.
>> Is that what the flare looks like on
this little model that I have in front
of me?
>> Yes. So, so going back for the people
who are listening and not on YouTube,
you can flip over to YouTube if you're
interested. But what I'm showing here is
the model of the large intestine. And
the model includes a little area that it
looks raw,
>> ulcerated, it's bleeding. It if you if
you were to bump up against it, it's
going to start to you'll start to see
blood coming out. So, it's like a it's a
very vulnerable sensitive uh area. Now,
these inflammatory bowel diseases,
Steve, I have an interesting study on
this topic. They are to me the classic
gut inflammatory health condition.
And what's happening is the immune
system is attacking the microbiome.
So technically, it's not actually
autoimmune
because autoimmune would be you're
attacking your own body. The immune
system is not attacking your intestines.
The immune system is attacking your
microbiome and rejecting it.
And because that's happening, your
intestines are stuck in the middle.
>> So this here is the immune system
attacking the microbiome. It's attacking
the microbiome which is in the tube of
the large intestine and the immune
system is trying to get at it and kill
it.
>> Why?
>> And because it's decided that it's the
enemy. So the immune system is confused
because when we're born,
we don't have much of a microbiome at
birth. It's the closest that we will get
to not really having anything. And then
during the first three years of life,
you build your microbiome through your
life experience. And by three years of
age, you are basically fully adult-sized
in terms of your microbiome. During this
time, your immune system is learning
from and with those microbes. So,
there's this interplay between the two
that is undeniable
where when the microbiome is healthy
during childhood, during those first
three years, it results in a healthier
immune system.
>> So, what's going on here? The immune
system is supposed to acknowledge your
microbiome as being friendly and it does
not. It decides that your microbiome is
the enemy and so it's taking it out. So
what what what do you think is for
someone that has like irritable bowel
syndrome or Crohn's disease and they or
they you know they have one of these big
sort of ulcers in their small or large
intestine. Is it because of their
lifestyle typically a lifestyle change
or
>> or is it lots of things? What's the
number one perpetrator?
>> Okay. There's clearly a genetic
component.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. So, we have to we have to be
upfront about that. Like these are these
are things that are not necessarily
within a person's control entirely
>> because I mean there's no evolutionary
reason why this would happen.
>> Like there's no evolutionary reason why
you'd have severe gut digestion
problems.
>> No, it's not to there's no advantage to
it at all. And and these things that uh
that occur, they were quite rare years
ago. In fact, in third world countries
today, there's not much inflammatory
bowel disease. There's not a lot of
Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis
in third world countries. If you go to
Africa, there's very little. And what
then what you see though is as countries
industrialize, there's a takeoff and
they start ramping up. So within the
United States over the course of 40
years from 1970 to 2010, ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease cases were
increasing by up to 55%.
And you can get that at any age.
>> You can get that at any age. Yeah.
>> So even if I'm healthy right now, I
could do a set of things that would give
me this.
>> Yes. In fact, if you take So back to our
conversation about antibiotics, if you
take antibiotics, your risk of
developing an inflammatory bowel disease
in the next year just doubled.
>> Oh gosh.
>> If you disrupt the gut with antibiotics,
which the antibiotics do, there's
nothing that will basically like
decimate the gut faster. Reducing gut
diversity. disrupting the gut barrier by
50% during a course of antibiotics and
activating the immune system. It really
speaks to that like if you take
antibiotics, these risks of inflammatory
health conditions really start to go up.
We see this in both adults and kids.
>> You had a patient of yours called
Michelle who took antibiotics and had a
life-threatening swelling of her colon.
This is this is the colon, right?
>> Uh
>> show me where the colon is.
>> So the colon is the large intestine.
>> Okay, fine. Yeah. Yeah.
>> And so she took an antibiotic and had a
life-threatening swelling of the of her
large intestine.
>> So she took an antibiotic. She took
clintomy which is a classic skin
antibiotic.
>> Okay.
>> And the problem is that clintomyosin
wipes out your gut like hard.
And when that happens, there's a risk
that this pathogenic like bad bacteria
called CIFF,
if it's in there, it can multiply and
then you get this infection, the C diff
infection that causes inflammation of
the entire colon. So this patient,
Michelle, what happens, I was on call
and I get this text and they say, "You
got to come to this room right now. This
patient is sick." And she had just been
transferred in from an outside hospital.
So, I was in the middle of typing up a
consultation. Drop that, run through the
hospital, walk into the room. She's
clutch clutching her belly and she's
moaning and groaning and she has no clue
where she is. She's sweaty. She's pale.
Her vital signs are completely out of
whack. Her heart is racing. She's
breathing really fast. And um and I did
a little test which is that I gently
bumped her bed just like that. And if a
person has severe inflammation of their
intestines,
they will jump if you do that because
they have peritonitis,
right? Or you could call it an acute
abdomen.
So just by bumping the bed like that was
ENOUGH FOR HER TO AND SHE'S SCREAMING,
RIGHT? And clutching her belly and she
has no clue where she is or what is
going on. She's completely delirious.
Uh she was maxed out on antibiotics.
Our choices were to rush her to surgery,
remove the colon, or alternatively to
give her a fecal transplant and give her
a shot at keeping her colon.
So, I take her down to the operating
room and I actually um used a I mean, I
won't bore you with the details, but I
used a special technique that's atypical
for what I would normally do because the
inflammation was so severe to pass a
scope.
So, this scope that I used was a smaller
scope to be more gentle.
>> A scope being a tube.
>> A scope is a tube. And I mentioned that
if you get a colonoscopy, it's the size
of my index finger. So that's like
probably about a centimeter across. But
I I instead went with a smaller scope
that's more like 5 millime 6 millimeters
across. It's more gentle and it just
makes it harder to do. But I I basically
passed the scope through her rectum and
all the way through her intestines to
get it over here on the right side. So
that's basically like I have now passed
all the way through her large intestine.
And in that location, I delivered the
fecal transplant to her.
And so the amazing thing is that number
one, that procedure went really well.
By the next day, she was a normal human
being. She was laying in bed. She was
able to have a conversation.
And after 2 days, she was so normal that
we were able to send her home.
So the entire
severe infectious issue that she was
facing
got shut down and corrected by restoring
her microbiome. And then when you
restore the microbiome, the C diff
basically gets suppressed and the immune
system falls back into balance. The
inflammation washed away.
>> So do you have like a like a fridge full
of these fecal matters that you can just
tap into when when you need it? No, but
there is a company in in Massachusetts
that does.
>> Um, and so and that's what most
hospitals use is they'll basically have
this sent in. But it's actually kind of
interesting because there's there's new
development in this space where for the
first time drug companies are actually
identifying how to manipulate the
microbiome using things that are not
actually a fecal transplant but sort of
derived from the idea. M
>> now what [clears throat] they're
developing is a way to rebuild the gut
and protect it during this period of
vulnerability. So that's the new thing
that's coming.
>> You must hear about so many different
types of diets and juice cleanses and
whatever else that influencers and
podcasters promote
that you absolutely hate because you
have a deeper understanding of the
consequences on the gut. What are some
of the biggest diets or I don't know
these sort of trends that you absolutely
despise because they are misinforming
people about how to create a healthy
gut?
>> Well, I think the thing from my
perspective is that um uh trends
fluctuate hard.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. In 2020, it was like the vegan
diet was in.
>> In [clears throat] 2023, it was the
carnivore diet. You couldn't have more
diametrically opposed diets.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And and so the problem is that to
the person who's at home and they're
trying to get this figured out, it's
very easy to get sucked into whatever
the trend is because that's what you're
hearing about when you open up your
social media, right? Whereas as I sit
here, the science has not changed that
dramatically in the last 5 years. We are
working on this, but these are small
fluctuations in terms of our
understanding of things. It's not a
radical. We don't whiplash like that,
>> right? So nor has your biology. you have
the same biology five years ago. So this
entire concept of like whipping people
over the place is total from my
perspective. I want to start by saying
that any person who has the audacity to
change their diet in the interest of
their health,
like I actually I actually think that's
incredible and it doesn't matter what
your choice is because you're just
trying to figure it out. And ultimately
I just want people to be better. But the
problem is that there's a lot of dietary
advice that's insane and it comes on
both sides, Steve. So, absolutely, I
don't believe that a 100% meat or organ
diet is imbalance or the optimal
solution for longevity.
But on the flip side, like a fruit only
diet, I would never support or recommend
either. That's completely insane. What
are we doing? So I think that like these
highly the more restrictive that you get
the more that I think you're drifting
away from what is quite simple which is
whole food in balance.
>> What about these like juice diets and
stuff like that? People do people do
like a 7-day juice diet or water diet or
whatever.
>> So you will you will often feel better
if you have gut issues and you take away
the stuff that's irritating your gut.
And so simplifying your diet and doing
something like that, you can make
yourself feel better on a temporary
basis and think that you did something,
generally speaking, that's not really
doing much of anything at all.
>> How long does it take to both kill and
then create new new gut microbes?
>> Well, so the beauty of it is that your
gut is very forgiving. So the choices
that you make today will be reflected in
your microbiome by tomorrow. The beauty
of it is that these microbes like their
superpower
is that they are able to procreate so
fast.
>> Procreate meaning making babies. So they
can make they can create new generations
like estimates are potentially as quick
as 20 minutes. And so we can use that to
our advantage because if we actually
support them with what they need, change
can come real quick. And you know, I get
back to every 3 to 5 days.
You build a new gut barrier.
So, there's an amazing opportunity that
we have to actually see some quick
health effects. Are there any big sort
of health myths or diet myths that
you're concerned about that people are
currently following or believe in
particular? Is there anything you look
out into the world and think, "Oh god,
that's going to be awful for the gut."
Oh gosh. It's not something that I pay a
ton of attention to because I'm not on
TikTok to be honest with you.
>> So, um it's I find it interesting that
actually like Tik Tok some of the trends
that have come more recently are
actually on point.
>> So, which feels great because I love it
when like people are getting excited
about stuff that's good. The like the
fiber maxing trend.
>> I'm not hiding about them. So fiber
maxing, it feels like
after not really talking about fiber for
a really long time, people are starting
to come around to the benefits that come
from fiber.
And this was really exemplified on Tik
Tok with this fiber maxing trend where
people are basically trying to increase
their fiber profoundly.
So the issue though is that you have to
ease your body into it. So, I think the
idea is the right idea of where people
are trying to go, but the execution, I
just want people to do it in a way where
they feel okay. Cuz if they don't feel
well, they're going to bail and then
they're going to think, well, fiber is
not for me.
>> And what was this trend? It was people
trying to just get above their up and
above their daily recommended dose of
fiber by eating high fiber foods.
>> Yes. And acknowledging that 95% of
people in the United States and 90% of
people in the UK are deficient in fiber
as we sit here right now. And what
complications or implications does that
have for one's gut microbiome?
>> Massive.
>> Because fiber is feeding the good
bacteria.
>> Fiber is the principal food for the good
bacteria. And it is the precursor to
short- chain fatty acids. So the short-
chain fatty acids are what we create
when fiber comes into contact with
microbes. Short chain fatty acids are
the thing we create when fiber comes in
contact with the gut microbiome.
>> Yes.
>> Bacteria. Okay. And the short- chain fat
fatty acids are really good.
>> They're so good. In fact, of all of the
things that I've studi studied and
learned about, these are the most
anti-inflammatory thing that I've ever
come across.
So, there's three of them, three main
ones. Acetate,
propriionate, and butyrate. They all
have their own distinct effects within
the body. They have effects right there
in the gut, on the microbes, on the gut
barrier, on the immune system.
>> And these are produced, these three
things you just named are produced when
fiber comes in contact with the gut
microbiome.
>> Yeah. So, like if you were sterile, if
you didn't have, if you were born
without a microbiome [clears throat]
>> um like you ever hear about Bubble Boy?
>> Oh, yeah. There was a film or TV show,
wasn't there?
>> Yeah. It was like a documentary in the
70s of this kid who was he was born with
this rare genetic immune disorder. And
so his family in order to try to protect
him, they isolated him thinking if if no
bad stuff can get in, then he would be
fine, right? So like he lived in a
sterile bubble. So in theory, if you
were sterile, you would never get the
benefits of these short- chain fatty
acids
>> because you'd never have bacteria.
>> Because you don't have bacteria.
>> Okay?
>> So we have the the opposite of that
problem, which is that we have bacteria,
but we don't feed them. We don't give
them fiber. You can't create something
from nothing. So you have to give them
the fiber in order to allow them to
create the short- chain fatty acids from
it.
>> And these short- chain fatty acut
microbiome in my gut here. I put fiber
in there in the form of what foods are
the best foods for fiber.
>> Okay. So what we have here is an entire
array of choices. [clears throat]
>> And the beauty of it is that there's
only one thing that I can spot on these
two plates that does not contain fiber.
Do you want to guess? I guess that it
is.
>> Okay.
>> You want me to give it to you?
>> It does.
>> Is it the It's not the turmeric, is it?
>> No, but the turmeric probably doesn't
have very much.
>> Okay.
>> No, it's the oil because the issue is
that this is 100% fat. So, you by
definition cannot have any fiber inside
of an oil.
>> Okay. Sorry.
>> It's like sunflower oil, olive oil.
>> So, yeah, whatever whatever type. Now,
it could have polyphenols, like
extravirgin olive oil has polyphenols
that are really good for the microbiome.
>> Extravirgin olive oil is actually
incredibly good for the microbiome, but
it doesn't have fiber. Everything else
has fiber. So, we have all these
different plant-based foods. And the
beauty of it is that it doesn't have to
be complicated. Fruits, vegetables,
whole grains, seeds, nuts, and legumes,
they all have fiber.
>> Meat, anything that's not a plant does
not have fiber. Oh,
>> okay. So, if it grows in the ground, it
has fiber. So if it comes if it comes
from a plant, it has fiber and that
includes, by the way, the mushrooms. So
the mushrooms are technically fungi.
Um, but they share a lot of the same
characteristics that the plant-based
foods do. So there's fiber, there's
polyphenols, all of these things we want
to include in a healthful diet. So if I
eat these high-fiber foods, they go into
my gut, the microbiomes produce this
thing called short- chain fatty acids.
And the short chain fatty acids, they
produce more good bacteria, but also
they help my immune system calm down.
Yes. So, if you think about, let's go
back to the model that we led off with,
which is that there's these three parts
to your immune system or actually your I
should call it your defense system
because your gut microbes are the first
layer of defense, right? That was what
was broken down by the antibiotics and
Michelle.
>> Mhm. [clears throat] The second layer of
defense is your gut barrier, which is
the lining of your gut that protects the
immune system.
>> And then the third part is the actual
immune system itself. We don't even want
to have to activate that. We'd rather
the first two parts take care of it for
us. Right? So the beauty of this is that
you eat, you consume these high-fiber
foods. They come into contact with your
microbes right here in the large
intestine. Specifically, the right colon
is the classic spot.
and they they unpack them and they
release the acetate, propriionate and
butyrate.
And those three things impact your
microbes, impact your gut barrier,
impact your immune system. Now, of the
three, my favorite is butyrate because
it's the butyrate that has the biggest
effect on the microbes, on the gut
barrier. like you literally need
butyrate in order to produce the
proteins that hold your uh your gut
lining together. Um and the butyrate has
a direct effect on our immune cells. So
these are again the most
anti-inflammatory thing that I've come
across and part of why we're suffering
with these going back to the original
conversation about these chronic
inflammatory health conditions and you
asked me where do they come from? We
live in an industrial world where 95% of
us at a minimum 90% of us are not
getting even close to the amount of
fiber that we need. And when we compare
this to other places, so there was an
interesting study that came out recently
where they looked at the microbiome of
people in Italy, Singapore, and then
they had native tribal people in the
Bolivian Amazon
and native tribal people in Malaysia. So
two indigenous tribes living a you know
hunter gatherer lifestyle.
against Italy and Singapore.
And what they discovered is that there's
this radical difference in terms of the
diversity of the microbiome. There's a
difference in terms of um their their
ability to produce short- chain fatty
acids.
And there's this question that comes up
about aging because as we age,
inflammation increases.
Is that inevitable?
Are we stuck in a position where like
based upon our age we should just expect
that we're going to have more
inflammatory issues? What they found in
the tribal populations is that actually
that's not true at all. So they were
protected against inflammation
regardless of their age because of their
lifestyle.
But they were living and it's not just
what they eat. It's they they wake up
when the sun comes up. They sleep when
the sun goes down. They're connected to
their tribe. They're not looking at
Instagram. Like there's so much to that
story. The point being though that in
the industrial world like we're not
consuming a sufficient amount of these
types of foods. I guess they're not also
drinking alcohol and vaping.
>> No.
>> Which we, you know, do a lot more in the
Western world.
>> Yeah, we do.
>> What impact does that have on the gut
microbiome? Because I don't typically
hear people talking about alcohol in the
gut microbiome. What we know is that it
definitely affects the gut barrier.
>> I guess total clarity wiping up my my
oral microbiome as well to some degree
if I'm pouring vodka.
>> And it would be the same as it would be
the same as using an alcohol-based
mouthwash,
>> right? Which which now we don't
recommend anymore.
And so yeah, so alcohol, there was a
study actually that changed my mind when
it comes to alcohol. So I actually don't
drink hardly at all anymore. like very
rarely I'll have a glass or two with my
wife if we're on a special dinner. And
in this study they they basically gave
people a significant amount of alcohol
and then they tracked every 30 minutes
the measure of their blood alcohol level
and simultaneously the measure of what's
called lipopolysaccharide.
So it's it comes from the inflammatory
bacteria that live inside of our
microbiome. It's not supposed to be in
your bloodstream.
If it's in your bloodstream, that
generally indicates that your gut
barrier is insufficient and weak because
it's able to get across. And the problem
is that the immune system
has been trained to identify that
lipopolysaccharide
as the enemy and so it gets activated.
So, and this is where inflammation comes
from. So, in this study, they had people
have a number of drinks and they start
tracking every 30 minutes. And what you
saw
was that as the blood alcohol level goes
up
in parallel, the lipopolysaccharide
goes up. When the alcohol peaks, so did
the lipopolyaccharide.
There was this weird thing that
happened. I don't I can't explain why,
but the alcohol level peaked. It started
to come down and then actually bumped
back up. And when that happened, the
lipopolysaccharide followed the exact
same pattern.
And the lipopolysaccharide
[clears throat]
did not return to normal until the
alcohol level was zero.
So when I saw this from my perspective,
to be clear, it wasn't a study of one
drink, although we do know that one
drink is sufficient to disrupt your
sleep and cause other health issues. But
when I saw this, I saw enough to say I
don't think there's any amount of
alcohol that's safe. To summarize what's
going on there, the alcohol is coming
into the body. It is impacting the gut
in some way which is making the gut
go into dysfunction and that dysfunction
lasts for a little while cuz I'm trying
to understand why you you looked at that
and thought do you know what absolutely
not I'm not going to drink as much as I
was.
>> Yeah. So basically alcohol was causing
leaky gut.
>> Oh leaky gut. Okay.
>> Yeah. So alcohol was causing leaky gut.
That's what that's what we saw in that
study. And the fact that the amount of
leaky gut was proportional to the amount
of alcohol in the blood and that the
leaky gut did not return to normal until
the alcohol level was zero
says to me that any amount of alcohol
that's detectable in the bloodstream can
create this problem which is going to
cause inflammation which is going to
cause inflammation. We know with total
clarity that people who are heavy
drinkers, their gut is totally destroyed
and that that's actually a requisite
step on the pathway towards developing
cerosis and alcoholic liver disease. So
there are some people who seem to get
away with it where they can be a heavy
drinker and they never actually get
cerosis.
And it
>> cerosis is
>> cerosis is the so the liver sits in your
right upper abdomen and its job is to
detoxify
your bloodstream. And all of the blood
that goes to your gut,
the first place that it goes after your
gut as it returns to the heart is your
liver. And it's actually a smart setup
anatomically because we don't want toxic
blood to get access to the heart and
then circulate and ultimately get back
to the brain. So we allow the liver to
protect and defend it. But the cerosis
what's happening is that basically the
liver which is soft and spongy like
imagine a sponge that you can put it
under a faucet. The water goes in one
end, wiggles its way through, comes out
the other end. Okay? Instead of that,
it's just a piece of plastic, right?
It's hard. It's not letting anything
through. That's what that's what happens
when a person develops cerosis.
>> So, and there's many causes of cerosis.
Cerosis comes from inflammation. So all
serot all cerosis health conditions
ultimately are inflammatory health
conditions. They're all part of the 130
health conditions associated with
inflammation. But in this particular
setting what we're talking about is
alcohol. And what I'm saying is that to
create that inflammation in the liver
based upon the available data it seems
that you have to disrupt the gut
microbiome in order to get there. So
many of us are pursuing passive forms of
income and to build side businesses in
order to help us cover our bills. And
that opportunity is here with our
sponsor Stan, a business that I co-own.
It is the platform that can help you
take full advantage of your own
financial situation. Stan enables you to
work for yourself. It makes selling
digital products, courses, memberships,
and more simple products more scalable
and easier to do. You can turn your
ideas into income and get the support to
grow whatever you're building. And we're
about to launch Dare to Dream. It's for
those who are ready to make the shift
from thinking to building, from planning
to actually doing the thing. It's about
seeing that dream in your head and
knowing exactly what it takes to bring
it to life. Join the challenge. Post a
video sharing your dream and enter to
win $100,000.
I've just finished writing my third
book. I haven't firmed up the title yet,
but I have started mocking up some
different designs. And I've been doing
this with Adobe Express, which is one of
our sponsors. What I love about Adobe
Express is that it makes it so easy for
me to obsess over the tiniest details.
The typography, the font, the color, the
text placement, the stuff that might
sound petty to most people, but actually
compounds to create something that
stands out, something that's one better
than the rest. And designing my cover
art has reminded me of how many creative
things I've learned over the year. But
it's also reminded me that there are so
many creative minds around me that are
also sitting on their own secrets. So,
I've created the one better guide in
Adobe Express to bring those tips to
you. And in it, you'll find principles
from the very, very best in their
industry turned into quick and easy
practices for you to apply so you can
train yourself to create exactly like
the best performing teams in the world
do. Just head over to adobe./1
better to download Adobe Express now and
make sure you visit the learn tab to
discover how you can become one better
than the rest. There's a orangey looking
chemical on the uh plate over there.
Turmeric. People talk about turmeric a
lot when they're speaking about
inflammation.
>> Yeah.
>> I'm not really sure what the truth is on
turmeric and inflammation.
>> Yeah.
>> You have to be a little bit careful
because you could easily overdo it.
>> Oh, really? So, well, so we just have to
be smart with the way that we approach
because the [snorts] turmeric that we're
really talking about is if you were to
take it on a consistent daily basis,
which actually from my perspective makes
a ton of sense for people that have
chronic inflammatory health issues.
>> So, turmeric is helping inflammation go
down somehow.
>> It turmeric is helping inflammation to
go down because it blocks another one of
the cytoines. So, in the same way we're
talking about those walkie-talkies and
basically pulling the batteries out,
>> turmeric helps to accomplish that.
>> So, there's a specific cytoine that that
turmeric has that effect. And so, it's
the you mentioned curcumin. So, curcumin
is the phytochemical
found in turmeric. Turmeric is the root.
>> Okay.
>> Curcumin is the chemical,
>> okay,
>> that actually does the thing. And it
turns out that kurcumin is what we call
a polyphenol. So polyphenols, as we sit
here and we look at this beautiful array
of all these colors,
every single one of these foods contains
polyphenols that define the color
and that impact the gut. Like the onion
here would have keretin and many people
have heard of keretin as being
beneficial for longevity. Same would be
true for the garlic. So there's
different polyphenols for different
colored foods and 95% of them require
our gut microbes in order to be
activated.
So with turmeric, you just need to be
careful with supplements because if you
overdo it, if you take too much, that
could create an issue, though. Here in
front of me, I have a I guess I guess
this is a perfect gut day. Have you seen
this?
>> Yeah.
I wanted you to explain to me step by
step how to have a perfect gut day.
Nice. All right.
So, I'm going to I'm going to define for
people the way that I would approach the
perfect 24-hour rhythm. We have an
innate circadian rhythm. Circadian
rhythm basically means that our body
functions on a 24-hour clock. Why?
Because we evolved with the sun. The sun
goes up and it comes down. And that is
one of the most powerful things that
defines everything that exists both for
us as humans and in our entire
environment. Right? So everything around
us also evolved with the sun and is
connected to it. Around 50% of our genes
are turned off or on at specific times
of day based upon our circadian rhythm.
More than 50% of our microbes rise and
fall during the course of our day to
meet the moment. Our body thrives on
consistency. So, what I want to talk
about is how do we create a consistent
daily routine
that can optimize our microbiome. And
I'm going to take you through all the
different all the different steps. Let's
imagine that the sun comes up and it's 7
in the morning.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. and you naturally wake up and
you are consistent about it, you're off
to a great start. Consistency with the
time that you wake up is a fantastic way
to start your day. And what I want you
to do in the first 5 minutes of your day
is I want you to
initially just focus on um waking up and
thinking about your day and how you're
going to approach it. Because starting
at 7:05,
you're going to wake up your microbes.
You're going to wake up your body with
hydration.
So, we're going to opt for water.
And in a perfect world, I would love to
add a prebiotic fiber supplement to that
water. So, like our company is called 38
Terra. You could add that there or you
can add an alternative.
This is the hydration. The water turns
on your gut,
turns on your brain, turns on your
kidneys.
>> So, not coffee straight away.
>> No. So, pause the coffee.
Start with hydration. And we're waking
up your gut with the water and also with
the prebiotic fiber that's going to feed
those microbes in your gut. Okay. So,
that's at 7:05. And let's pretend that
takes you 10 minutes. And so now it's
7:15
and we're going to basically flip the
switch to tell your body it's time to go
that we're starting a new day. And this
is actually the most powerful moment. So
if there's only one thing that everyone
takes away, I want it to be this because
I'm giving you the two most powerful
levers in terms of activating your
circadian rhythm. Number one, sunlight
or at a minimum bright light exposure.
So what happens is that light
passes through our our eye and hits the
retina in the back of the eye,
enters into the body detects this and it
enters into the optic nerve. And right
at the very first spot where you could
collect information from both your left
eye and your right eye sits this part of
your brain called the supra kaismatic
nucleus, the SCN.
And the SCN is the orchestrator. That is
the master clock of your circadian
rhythm. So like I would think about it
like school. So when we were kids and we
went to school, we might have all been
wearing a watch. And that watch gives us
a general idea of where we are in our
day. All your organs, all your tissues,
more than half your microbes, they have
their watch. They have a feel for where
they are in the day. But it's the alarm
that goes off between classes that
ultimately is what matters the most.
That's the central clock.
>> That's your SCEN. Your SCEN is basically
managing all of that. And there's an
entire cascade of things that follows
from when you tell the SCEN today
started.
So that light exposure is what basically
activates the SCN to release cortisol
through a through a series of events. It
releases cortisol. All right. Cortisol
is the morning hormone.
It is it it allows us to get activated.
It makes protein and and uh energy
available to our cells. It makes us
focused. It actually suppresses our
immune system.
In that moment, you want more cortisol.
And by getting morning light exposure,
you can bump it by 50%.
[clears throat]
>> So, we're off to a good start. The
second lever that we can pull with our
outdoor time is exercise.
You don't need to do like a full scale
workout. I'm not talking about the most
vigorous exercise of your day. I'm
talking about light exercise.
But if you just move your body, right,
which during the summertime,
what you would do is like you might go
outside and you might have a ruck fest
and you take a walk, right? When the
weather is good. And when it's January
and the weather isn't so hot, you might
actually have a light box. The light box
allows you to stay inside.
You just got to make sure it's 10,000
lux is what you're looking for. So the
light box is the substitute for the sun.
And then you could do any form of
exercise. You could do squats, you could
do lunges, push-ups, whatever it may be.
You could do jumping jacks,
>> do yoga.
>> Right? So during this period of time, if
you get light exposure and you exercise,
the exercise can add another 25 to 50%.
This is a compounding effect that's
going to give you the ultimate morning
cortisol peak. And this is essential to
propel your day because by getting this,
you will be more focused. You will be
able to do more from a cognitive
perspective like your endurance will be
enhanced.
Um, you also will uh sleep better
tonight and you will you will notice
this on day one. I promise you. So, all
right. So, and you're going to do that
for about 20 minutes. So, from 7:15
until 7:35, you're going to be doing
your light and exercise. Okay? Ideally,
outdoor light whenever possible. If you
wear glasses, by the way, take off your
glasses. You don't have to look directly
at the sun. At 7:35,
we're going to basically come back in
and this is a time for us to now have
our coffee
and also quiet time.
So, like to me, we don't have enough
time in our day. The day is so
fast-paced,
right? We need to be intentional about
creating opportunities to like activate
our parasympathetic nervous system
>> which is
>> so there's two sides to our autonomic
nervous system. Autonomic is just like
you have like you you can't totally
control it. It's just going
one side is sympathetic. Sympathetic is
the part that gets you going fast. Like
this is your accelerator. All right? And
the other side is your parasympathetic
which is your break. It's your rest and
recovery.
So, now that you've done your outdoor
time and your exercise, you come in and
we want to give you 10 minutes of just
like quiet, low-key, sympathetic time.
So, that could be meditation,
breath work, could be reading your
Bible, could be journaling, right?
Whatever it is that works for you. So,
you do that with your coffee for 10
minutes and that brings us to 7:45.
And now you have breakfast. All right.
So, and breakfast um is the perfect
opportunity to take your supplements.
>> Okay. So, what breakfast? What
supplements?
>> Okay. So, your breakfast and
>> what is my breakfast strategy? Am I
going for a lot of food? Do I need to
have breakfast? Why do I need to have
breakfast?
>> You should have breakfast. You should
definitely have breakfast. Yeah. So, um
your metabolism
changes during the course of the day.
your strongest metabolism is first thing
in the morning.
And so what that means is that you could
literally eat the exact same food at
7:45
or at 3:00 in the afternoon. And when
you eat it at 7:45, you will get better
blood sugar control. You will get better
blood fat control. So those are those
are manifestations of our metabolism.
And when they're under control, that's
actually really good for our body.
So whenever possible, we want to shift
our food towards earlier in the day.
>> And what kind of foods?
>> I would argue that we go high fiber and
moderate protein.
>> Low sugar.
>> No sugar. Yeah. Low low sugar, right?
>> Low or no sugar.
>> Refined carbohydrates should get left
out as much as possible.
>> What's a refined carbohydrate? Give me
>> flour or sugar.
>> Okay. So no
>> no baked goods,
>> no eggs benedict. Uh, so the exception
from my perspective would be if you're
going if you want to have avocado toast
than a sourdough.
>> Awesome.
Prefer not. They're delicious.
>> But no, I prefer not because ultimately
what we want is we want we want high
fiber and moderate protein. And by doing
that combination, it's maximum
satiation. So you're going to feel full.
You're giving your body what it needs
from a protein perspective. and you're
simultaneously giving your gut what it
needs from a fiber perspective.
>> Oats.
>> So, I mean, you could do oats do for the
reasons that we were discussing
glyphosate earlier, the oats should be
organic.
And if you were to do them, do them as
minimally processed. So, like I don't
really love instant oats. What about for
kids? If I'm, you know, giving my kids a
breakfast, should I be thinking about
anything in particular? cuz you know a
lot of a lot of parents um I've talked
about this quite a few times before but
when I was younger I'd get a lot of
orange juice and I didn't realize that
orange juice was just like sugar water.
>> Yeah.
>> Is there anything that parents should be
thinking about when they're giving kids
their breakfasts?
>> Of course. Um and I think that the most
important thing is that you need to
model for your kids what a healthy
breakfast looks like
>> by having it yourself.
>> By eating it yourself
>> because if you don't do that then
they're you can't expect them to. So,
um, healthy breakfast. My kids, I have
four kids, so my kids love avocado
toast. They love avocado toast. Um, you
could absolutely do yogurt with berries,
right? You could do berries and nuts.
There's a lot of different choices in
that regard. So, overnight oats, chia
pudding, these are different choices
that you could do for sure. On this
point of kids, before we carry on with
our perfect morning and day routine, are
there decisions that you make as a
parent to give your kids certain things
that will have a lasting impact on their
immune and gut function?
>> 100%.
Yes. And the I think it opens up a
discussion about where the connection
between our gut and immune system
starts. It starts before birth.
The first three years are critical.
So, let me unpack that just a little
bit,
Steve. They have studies where they look
at mom's microbiome during pregnancy.
All right? So, like mom poops, they
analyze her poop
and they're able to basically identify
patterns that are associated with the
kid
developing allergic diseases later on.
>> Oh, okay. They also have studies where
moms who increase their fiber intake
during pregnancy
reduce the likelihood of their kids
developing allergic diseases later on as
well.
>> What about kids taking antibiotics? Does
that have a when you're forming your gut
microbiome at a young age? Does that
have a consequential impact?
>> 100%. Antibiotics,
uh, bottle feeding and birth by
cescareian section. And by the way, all
of my kids were born by C-section. It's
not what we wanted, but it's what
happened. But those three things are
associated with an impact on the
microbiome and the immune system. And if
you look downstream over the course of
the first 5 years, increased risk of
allergic diseases,
increased risk of autoimmune diseases,
increased risk of metabolic diseases
>> because in a C-section, it the baby
didn't pass through
>> the birth canal.
>> The birth canal and the birth canal
would have given the baby some of the
mother's microbiome.
>> Yes. So,
>> and then breastfeeding does the same. It
gives the baby microbiome.
>> Breastfeeding gives them access to mom's
skin microbiome.
>> Okay.
>> But also breast milk contains these
things called HMOs, human milk
oligosaccharides. It's quite fascinating
to consider this.
We evolved where mom's breast milk
contains these things, human
milkosaccharides. There's over 200
varieties. They have no nutritional
value to the child directly. So why do
we why do we have them? Because they're
prebiotic. So these human milk
oligosaccharides in breast milk were
basically designed to feed the
developing baby microbiome.
>> So and this is part of why we get into
some challenges where when you replace
it with with the bottle the formula you
might put fiber in there but it's like a
mono fiber. It's not the same as the 200
plus varieties of human
milkosaccharides.
So there was a study that was done out
of Finland where they looked at
roughly,00 kids and they tracked them
for 5 years
and during this time 5 years they got a
microbiome specimen poop specimen from
the kid at 3 months and 12 months of age
and they looked at okay so some of these
kids develop allergic diseases so
eczema, food allergies
asthma,
um, rhinitis, allergic rhinitis.
All right, those are the classic
allergic diseases.
And what they found is, okay, there were
certain factors that predicted who was
going to develop allergic diseases by
the age of five. Number one, exposure to
antibiotics in the first year of life.
Number two, being bottlefed.
All right. Then they looked at the
microbiome at 12 months. So, and just to
be clear, these kids, they they had not
developed the allergic disease yet.
That comes later, but they looked at the
microbiome at 12 months and they could
tell who was going to develop the
allergic diseases later on because there
was a specific pattern.
What was missing were the bacteria that
produce short- chain fatty acids.
>> And the short- chain fatty acids are
that chemical we talked about earlier on
that
>> that you get from fiber
>> which produces those three things. Yes.
>> But butyrate
>> butyrate, acetate and propriionate.
>> And and in in fact when they checked the
poop for butyrate levels, the butyrate
levels were low.
So in essence what they discovered in
this study that was quite fascinating is
that you can look at the microbiome and
predict who will later on go on to
develop these confu the confused immune
system
with these allergic diseases.
>> So going back to our daily routine.
>> Yep.
>> Where are we to?
>> Yes. Yes, we're at 7:45 and you So, you
want your high fiber, moderate protein,
as little sugar as possible, breakfast,
and this is the perfect time to take
your morning supplements because the
morning supplements, the ones that I
recommend that are evidence-based are
vitamin D, omega-3s, and turmeric.
>> That's for inflammation.
>> So, these are for inflammation.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. So, now I also believe that we
should test whenever possible. There's a
test for vitamin D. There's a test for
omega-3s. If you have enough, you don't
need to take the supplement. But if
you're deficient, that's where
supplements play an important role. So,
I believe that that supplements should
be taken consistently in a circadian
fashion.
So, that means that we take our morning
supplements at the same time every day.
>> Why?
Because basically everything about our
microbes and our body and the way that
it works thrives on consistency. So
supplements would be the same.
>> And when we do this, so it's been 7:45.
We've had our breakfast. We've taken our
morning supplement stack
and now it's been an hour since we woke
up and it's time for a fantastic bowel
movement. And that is the manifestation
of all the work that you've done.
Because when you get your morning light
exposure, that helps to contribute to
that bowel movement. When you exercise,
that contributes to that bowel movement.
When you drink your coffee, that
contributes to that bowel movement. All
these different things ultimately lead
to this to this place where you're
having that good healthy bowel movement.
And that's indicative
of a gut that's in rhythm and doing
well. So that's your morning. Now you're
going to go to work. And I want to
circle back to roughly the lunchtime
hour. So you it gets to be lunchtime
and it's 12:00 noon and basically
I would advocate for people to have
lunch with another person like the way
that you and I are sitting here at this
table right now. So because we don't do
that enough like way too much we're on
our phone like this and eating at the
same time that we're flipping and
scrolling.
>> How is that good for my gut and
inflammation though? So feeling socially
bonded to another person
50% this is by the way statistics that
come from before the pandemic right so
the pandemic made this worse 50% of
people in America were lonely
before the pandemic even started
loneliness is the equ loneliness will
destroy your longevity faster than just
about anything loneliness is has been
shown to be on par with smoking
cigarettes on a routine basis in terms
of the impact that it has on your health
and your longevity.
>> And you're quite clear there that you
define loneliness as the feeling of
disconnection versus being alone,
>> right? Yes.
>> Okay.
>> So, but being alone there, you have to
think about where we came from.
So, we
um are tribal by our nature. Like you
have to understand that for millions of
years,
humans lived the specific lifestyle of
being hunter's gatherers in our tribe.
There was no money.
The currency of wealth was your bonds to
other people. That's what allowed you to
survive and thrive.
Your family was like basically the the
measure of wealth. The bigger the
family, the more wealthy you were
because you would work together to
support one another and take care of
each other. But then the broader tribe,
which is not 300 people, let alone
hundreds of thousands on social media.
The broader tribe, which was this like
family of families, we were in it
together. If you and I were in the same
tribe, if someone attacked us, I know
that you would step up to defend me and
I would do the same for you. So this is
causing some kind of cortisol issue,
stress issue that's then impacting the
gut microbiome and causing inflammation.
>> If we want to torture a person, like
literally the easiest way to do it is to
put them in solitary isolation.
That's literally torture. We're so
social that we need that. And it's the
cortisol response that that's going to
cause that. That's that then causes
inflammation.
>> That is correct. So ultimately that is a
manifestation of the brain gut
connection.
>> Okay. We have a we have an innate need
of human bonding and when that innate
need is not met then it's actually quite
stressful for us because we feel
vulnerable and unsafe.
>> Mhm. We sleep worse as well. I was
reading about some stuff around um when
people feel lonely they go into
self-preservation which is kind of like
I guess the the analogy would be if you
drifted off from your tribe.
>> Yeah.
>> You would have to be a bit more alert.
You'd have to be on edge. You'd have to
be wait you know you couldn't sleep for
8 hours in peace because you you're in
danger now. Yeah,
>> you don't have that sort of insulating
factor of a group of people.
>> It's it's so interesting to think about
like there's a condition called
Stockholm syndrome and Stockholm
syndrome is what happens if you take a
person hostage and in that scenario
you're the person who's taken hostage.
You have a choice. You can reject the
person who's taken you or you can
actually find the good in them and bond
with them. Mhm.
>> And it's actually a survival mechanism
that within that context of being taken
hostage, people have a tendency to bond
with their captor and have sympathy for
them.
>> And that's and we think that's a defense
mechanism because we're so social. We
need that as opposed to like being alone
and being held captive.
>> Okay. So, so we socialize at lunch. We
have dinner with other people.
>> Yes. So, I want people to socialize at
lunch to address this epidemic of
loneliness that I think is highly
problematic and not and not to be
underrated because again, that's like
smoking a pack of cigarettes. So, let's
imagine that we have a nice lunch time.
We're not talking about 10 minutes.
We're talking about 45 minutes that
includes conversation, right? And we get
to the end. And now, what I would
encourage people to do before you go
back to work is to get outside and take
a walk. So, there's two advantages to
this. We talked earlier about the
benefits of sunlight in the morning and
also the benefits of exercise in the
morning. We're circling back to that.
But things are a little bit different
this time. By getting outside, you're
getting different rays of sun. So the
actually the types of rays that we get
from the sun are slightly different and
they're more likely to boost our
serotonin
later in the day. And that serotonin is
what lifts our mood, gives us focus,
helps us to get to to get things done.
So this reinforces our circadian rhythm
when we take a walk and we get outside a
second time.
Also, the exercise, a 10-minute walk,
just 10 minutes of simple walking is
enough to get 30 to 40% improvement in
your blood sugar control.
Because when you activate the big
muscles in your leg, it helps to draw
the blood sugar out of your bloodstream.
So like it's uh the messaging there is
if you just ate too much and you don't
feel well, force yourself to take a
walk.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> As opposed to laying on the couch.
>> Mhm.
>> All right. So um and the outdoor walk
also activates our gut and helps our gut
to get into rhythm and that reduces
bloating after a meal. Okay. So, and
then you do that for 15 minutes. It's
one o'clock. You're back to work. I
encourage people to have a matcha green
tea. Um, I'm a big matcha believer. This
is the of all the teas that exist. It
has the highest polyphenol content and
it's phenomenal for the microbiome.
So, and it gives you a nice boost to
your afternoon.
Okay, let's accelerate to 4:00.
I saw you um I think was it in your book
that I read this? Yeah. In your book it
talks about how the gap between sort of
3 and 6 is the optimal time to exercise.
That's right. Yeah. So 3 and 6 p.m. The
reason for that has to do with our core
body temperature. So our temperature
cools off at night. Our body temperature
lowers at night and then during the day
it starts to rise in the morning.
Exercise by the way in the morning helps
to accelerate that. But our peak is 3 to
6 pm.
>> I felt attacked on page 159 of your book
where you said, "My one request is that
you do not have heavy exercise late in
the evening as this activates the par
sorry, the sympathetic nervous system
and can negatively affect your ability
to quickly fall asleep."
>> Yeah. What What time are you working
out?
>> I mean, last night it was like bloody
god 11 till midnight.
>> Oh no.
>> That's like quite typical though because
I don't know. I just It's when I get my
time.
>> How's your sleep
>> last night? feel great. But I mean like
a series of issues took place.
>> Two hours. So, okay, fair enough.
>> Yeah, like a series of like my other
issues.
>> The time I ate was bad and
>> the time I went to the gym was bad and
so was was a mess.
>> Yeah. Well, ideally 2 hours before
bedtime.
>> Okay.
>> At least two [clears throat] hours
before bedtime. So, and like especially
when it's vigorous exercise. If it's
light exercise, it's not a big deal.
>> But vigorous [clears throat] exercise is
a different story.
>> Okay.
>> So, yeah. So, three three to six. This
is more from like an exercise
performance perspective. Like that's the
best time if you want to lift heavy
weight,
>> okay?
>> 3 to 6 p.m. So, let's imagine that we go
and we get we smash a workout at 4:00,
right? And so, I'm going to give us an
hour to smash that wonderful workout and
then now is 5:00 and it's the perfect
time for dinner. I want to point
something out real quick. I we had
breakfast around 8 and we had lunch
around noon and we had dinner around 5.
We've spaced things out by about four
hours. And that's actually the perfect
time from from the perspective of your
digestive rhythm.
So there's this thing this this concept
within the the gut that many people
haven't heard of called the migrating
motor complex where between meals your
gut has this entire thing that it does
and it basically is like sweeping
through and reorganizing itself.
But it gets disrupted if you eat.
>> Okay?
>> So it's ideal to give a 4hour space
between these meals and that if you do
that you will actually notice a
difference in terms of how you feel with
your digestion.
So because you've allowed your gut to
fall into a rhythm.
All right. So we have our dinner. It's
5:00. We're moving into the evening
and now it's going to be 7:00 at night.
And let's imagine, I know this time of
year the sun is going down much earlier
than this in most places. Um, but
imagine that it's 7 o'clock. Look, when
the sun goes down,
you want to start to dim the lights in
your house. You want to start to reduce
your personal light exposure
because light exposure, just casual
lights within your home can cut your
melatonin down by 30%.
Melatonin is the sleepy time hormone.
So in the morning it's cortisol
and in the evening it's melatonin.
And it's interesting
because
what we did in the morning with both
exercise and with light exposure, it was
designed not only to enhance that that
cortisol peak, but it also increases our
serotonin.
Serotonin, the happy hormone that keeps
us focused. Well, serotonin is actually
the precursor to melatonin.
So, when you make the investment of
morning light, morning exercise, you're
setting yourself up for excellent sleep
in 14 hours.
So, and we want to protect that.
Melatonin is going to start to rise when
it gets dark outside. And so, we want to
dim the lights within our home. And we
want to really be cautious as we move
towards 8:00. If our bedtime is going to
be 10:00,
forgive me if that's too early for some
people, but I think it's like nice to
have a consistent bedtime. If our
bedtime is 10, then by 8:00, like we
want to be sort of dialing back on our
devices or wearing blue light blocking
glasses.
The blue light blocking glasses can help
to protect us. And then roughly 8:30,
take your evening supplements. So, we
had our morning supplements, which were
vitamin D, omega-3s, and turmeric. Now,
we want to take our evening supplements,
which are zinc, and magnesium.
And if you take melatonin, that would be
the time to do it. Or if you take a
different sleepy time supplement, that
would be the time to do it. Roughly 8:30
to 9, somewhere in that range. So,
because it's going to take about 60 to
90 minutes to really kick in
around nine o'clock, we want to activate
our evening ritual.
And so, in the morning, we had our quiet
time. We should have a quiet time in the
evening too to intentionally activate
our parasympathetic nervous system and
get like relaxed before bedtime
so that at 9:30
we uh basically are preparing for
bedtime and that might mean a hot shower
like actually like heat at night hot
shower sauna is perfect because actually
it cools off your inner core temperature
believe it or not. So, and that's
exactly what we want. We want a cool
room. We want a dark room and that will
help us to sleep better because then at
10:00 we want to go to bed and 10:00
like it could be whatever time. But I
would argue that we should be
consistent. It could be 10:30, it could
be 11. Whatever time you choose, adapt
to it. But the point from my perspective
is not so much 10 is the magic number.
It's more so that 10 is the magic number
if you always do 10. 10:30 is the magic
number if you always do 10:30.
Consistency is key.
>> And you would recommend three three
meals a day.
>> I think that you could do three meals. I
think that like the the way that we
structured this
is that if you were done eating at 6:00
at night and then you're having
breakfast around 8, you have a 14-hour
fast.
>> Do you think that fasting window
matters?
>> That specific number 14 or
>> Yeah, just like generally generally
having sort of a big intermittent
fasting window where you you haven't
eaten for 16 hours, whatever it might
be.
>> I think that there's so I think that
there there's two parts to the value
that we get from timerestricted eating.
So the first is we give our gut a time
to rest.
>> So when you when you particularly eating
late at night, like I honestly the
timing of it all could be debated. The
one spot where it's a total
non-negotiable from my perspective is
late night eating. So I mean no offense,
like sometimes we're busy, right?
>> But when you eat late at night, it hits
you different metabolically
>> and then it carries and it lingers into
the next day
>> and it will affect your sleep. Yeah.
>> So, we really as much as possible want
to opt for early dinner time and then
shut it down for the evening as much as
possible.
>> People will be saying, "Yes, but I'm
hungry."
>> And I think part of the reason that
they're hungry from what you've
explained is probably because they
didn't have breakfast.
>> Yeah.
>> They like started eating later. That's
what typically what I find is if I have
breakfast, I I'm typically not hungry
late at night.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I think that I think that
breakfast helps to sort of set the tone
for the rest of the day in a in a
specific way. So the two the two
advantages of timerestricted eating are
that you get that you get that gut rest
which anything over 12 hours is good for
the gut and then the second part is I
think it just the underrated thing that
no one talks about is it helps us to get
more consistent with our meal times. So
this entire conversation about circadian
rhythm can be summarized in one word
consistency.
If you ate at the same time every single
day, you would feel the difference in
terms of your digestion. I promise you.
And so the advantage of timerestricted
eating is it brings attention to what
time am I eating dinner? What time am I
eating breakfast? And then you end up
being a lot more consistent about it as
opposed to just flying by the seat of
your pants.
>> Do you fast ever? Do you try and
>> like long fast?
>> Long fast or just sort of more
timerestricted eating self?
>> I do. I do time restricted eating all
the time. In fact, I most days like I uh
first of all um I'm imperfect.
>> And so what that means is I don't
perfectly follow all the advice I give.
So like I don't eat breakfast most days.
>> Yeah.
>> Cuz I'm going hard. So like I wake up, I
do my morning routine, I get I get to
the coffee stage and then I jump into
work.
>> Same.
>> So but on today
>> today I did. Yeah. Yeah. Today I had my
breakfast because I wanted to be okay
>> on my game. But on the weekend I I have
my breakfast. I noticed the difference
actually. like I'm I'm less hungry
during the day when I have that
breakfast that sort of just keeps it
balanced.
Um so yeah, I sometimes I do one meal a
day. Last month I told you about a
challenge that I'd set our internal
flightex team. Flightex team is our
innovation team internally here. I tked
them with seeing how much time they
could unlock for the company by creating
something that would help us filter new
AI tools to see which ones were worth
pursuing. And I thought that our sponsor
Fiverr Pro might have the talent on
their platform to help us build this
quickly. So I talked to my director of
innovation Isaac and for the last month
my team Flight X and a vetted AI
specialist from Fiverr Pro have been
working together on this project. And
with the help of my team, we've been
able to create a brand new tool which
automatically scans, scores, and
prioritizes different emerging AI tools
for us. Its impact has been huge. And
within a couple of weeks, this tool has
already been saving us hours triing and
testing new AI systems. Instead of
shifting through lots of noise, my team
Flight X has been able to focus on
developing even more AI tools, ones that
really move the needle in our business,
thanks to the talent on Fiverr Pro. So,
if you've got a complex problem and you
need help solving it, make sure you
check out Fiverr Pro at
fiverr.com/diary.
If there's anything we need, it is
connection, especially in the world
we're living in today. And that is
exactly why we created these
conversation cards. Because on this
show, when I sit here with my guests and
have those deep, intimate conversations,
this remarkable thing happens time and
time again. We feel deeply connected to
each other. At the end of every episode,
the guest I'm interviewing leaves a
question for the next guest. And we've
turned them into these conversation
cards. And we've added these twist cards
to make your conversations even more
interesting. And there are so many more
twists along the way with the
conversation cards. This is the brand
new edition. And for the first time
ever, I've added to the pack this gold
card, which is an exclusive question
from me. But I'm only putting the gold
cards in the first run of conversation
cards. So get yours now before the
limited edition gold cards are all gone.
Head to the link in the description
below. One of the things you we touched
on briefly at the beginning was this
concept that trauma is linked to gut
function.
>> Powerfully.
>> In what way? We we were talking a moment
ago about the autonomic nervous system
which is sympathetic versus
parasympathetic.
We live our lives on sympathetic
overdrive which basically is the
equivalent of constantly feeling
threatened, right? Heart rate heart rate
pumping, blood pressure up, more
focused,
but then you suffer the consequences
within your gut. The gut gets sacrificed
when we are activating our sympathetic
nervous system.
We don't do enough to do the opposite
which is the parasympathetic nervous
system which is what happens with when
we slow down
conversations holding hands hugs uh
prayer journaling meditation sauna
that's parasympathetic.
Okay. So to the trauma question,
it's been shown that and this is
something that I had to learn not only
myself but I had to see that
I always thought that kids
if they were young enough they wouldn't
remember. And what I've realized is
actually this idea of like the body
keeps the score is so well said. It's so
true.
>> The body does keep the score. You can
have trauma that occurs before the age
of two. There's no way you remember
that. And yet it will manifest later on
in adults. And this has been shown
actually in kids that are um adopted and
like have an unstable first two years of
life. They are more likely to suffer
with health related issues later on.
this this issue of trauma what happens
is that it restructures the brain and
how your brain functions
>> and it keeps you sort of trapped in that
fight or flight state
>> keeps you trapped. Yeah. So, there's a
part of our brain called the amygdala.
>> And the amygdala is what gets activated
if you like uh go to a haunted house,
you know, like if you get scared of
something,
>> right? Or like uh it's the middle of the
night and you hear something creepy in
the bushes and you're not sure what's
going on. Okay, so that's the activation
of your amydala. Well, the the issue for
people that suffer from trauma is that
they live with the amygdala perpetually
turned on. So, if something's happened
to me in my life that's caused some form
of trauma, there's an increased
probability that I'm going to be in a
more sympathetic state in terms of my
nervous system, which is going to
activate a hormone, which is then going
to disrupt my gut motility and all the
other things we talked about, um,
like the gut barrier and other
dysfunction across the gut.
What is the link there? Is it is it the
hormone that's produced when I'm in that
stress state that is impacting my immune
system which is then having the impact
on my gut?
>> Yes. So this is all a manifestation of
the brain of the brain gut connection.
So the
what's happening is that your brain has
the ability to release a hormone
corticotropen releasing hormone
>> CR and CR is this that's effectively
your sympathetic nervous system getting
activated turned on.
>> Mhm.
>> In a person who's had trauma and to be
clear like not everything that's bad is
trauma, right? It's possible to have
things that are bad that are not actual
trauma. Trauma is the thing that sticks
with you. It's it's when you have
something occur that overwhelms your
ability to cope with it. [clears throat]
>> And so and then it has this lasting
effect. I was thinking as you're
speaking about some of my friends that
have had some bad diagnosis recently.
Got a friend that got diagnosed with
something very very serious. And what I
then noticed is after that diagnosis,
they had lots of other health related
issues that seem to be unconnected.
>> Mhm. But the doctors associated with
stress.
>> Yeah.
>> And maybe the traumatic news of that one
thing has caused this cascade of other
issues downstream.
>> Yeah. 100%. And and that's all a
manifestation of the of the brain gut
axis. So the brain gut axis is how we
think about the brain being connected to
our gut and how they're in communication
with one another. And within that
context, the brain releases this
hormone, the CR, corticotropen releasing
hormone that has an effect throughout
the entire body. It puts them on edge.
Mhm.
>> And the consequence is that that CR
that's like um so this is a bit nuanced
but let me clarify something about
cortisol.
Cortisol is the morning hormone.
When you get that spike in the morning
it's perfect. It's exactly what your
body needs. What you don't need is you
don't need cortisol to still be elevated
at 10 o'clock, 11 o'clock, midnight, 1
in the morning. Cortisol is the get up
and go hormone. Right now it's
disrupting your sleep. Now it's actually
the adversary of your of your circadian
rhythm. And that's what's happening in
these people is that through that the
brain gut access they're activating the
cortisol. And the cortisol then disrupts
their gut barrier and leads to
inflammation.
>> Where does healing from that trauma
start in your view? If a patient were to
come to you
>> Yeah.
>> and they were they had loads of
complications with their gut. Yeah. But
you were able to identify that trauma
was playing a role. Where would you
start with with their healing journey?
>> The most important thing is to is to and
I think this is the the moment that will
be most impactful for some of the
listeners, not all but some. The most
important thing is to understand that
the trauma is the root of the issue
because most people the way that we
react to trauma it's the part that we
don't want to talk about,
>> right? So we push it into the corner and
we pretend that it's not there. We're
not like we know it's there but we're
not going to even look at it. And so the
solution is to accept and acknowledge
that the trauma is the root of the
problem because then you need to
actually turn towards it. And that's
under professional that's with
professional help.
>> So there's different things that you can
do different approaches including
cognitive behavioral therapy. They're
all administered by trained health
professionals. That's not what I do. But
step one is the acknowledgement and
understanding that's the problem.
>> You remember last time we made lots of
uh different shapes of poop.
I think we were using what's the the
Bristol stool? There we go.
>> Yeah,
>> we have this Bristol [clears throat]
stool thing here which is the different
types of poop that people produce. Um
[snorts] and on this table I think we
have a variety of different styles.
Just to remind me once again, if I was
guessing, I would assume
that maybe this one is healthy or this
one.
>> Yeah.
>> Which one is healthy?
>> The chocolate bar is your is your So,
this sweet chocolate bar right here is
your glorious Bristol 4.
>> What's a Bristol?
>> Right. A Bristol four. So, the Bristol
stool scale is seven unique types of
poop.
And you can tell by looking in the
toilet bowl. We have been told, "Don't
look. There's nothing to see there." But
what I'm saying is, and we discussed
this, that 60% of the weight of your
stool is your microbiome. That's the
microbiome story right there in the
toilet bowl. And so the Bristol 4 is the
normal bowel movement. And it should be
it's it shouldn't be a rectangle, but um
it's soft but formed like a sausage. And
the word Bristol is coming from this
thing called the Bristol stool chart.
>> Yeah. So the Bristol stool chart
actually comes from Bristol in the UK,
right? The city of Bristol. Um where
they did a study in the early '9s and
what came of that study was the
discovery of these seven unique stool
types. So and four is normal and three
many people would consider normal. Three
is just sort of lumpy bumpy like this.
Um but and many people would consider
that to be normal. But type one and two
are constipation
and uh types six and six and seven are
diarrhea. Now what's interesting is that
the Bristol study was one location in
the UK 2,000 people. Actually at Zoey we
did a a nationwide survey in the UK and
we had 140,000 people tell us about
their poop. So, we actually have we're
working on publishing the papers that
came from this, but we have the largest
survey on bowel habits that's ever been
done in the world.
>> And how many people's people is healthy?
>> Well, based upon this, actually, it was
interesting because the results were
about what you expect. There's a
disproportionate number of people that
are struggling with bowel rellated
issues. So, it's probably about 40% of
people that are struggling with bowel
rellated issues. Of all the different
types of poop one could have, is there
any that I should be most concerned
about?
>> If you have these like little pellets,
>> rabbit pellets,
that's severe constipation.
>> And is that a lack of something? A lack
of fiber.
>> It can be a lack of fiber for sure.
Okay.
>> But sometimes it's a stool softening
issue, too. So like for people that have
severe constipation,
fiber is more nuanced than than people
are willing to discuss on social media.
Everyone makes it sound like the simple
solution is just increase your fiber.
It's not necessarily that simple. So
sometimes you have to add magnesium.
Magnesium supplements are great with
fiber.
>> What do they do?
>> So they help to draw water into the
intestine
>> and that water softens up the stool. So
if you have the fiber for the form and
you have the magnesium to make it soft,
this is how you get a soft formed bowel
movement. We talked a moment ago about
taking a nighttime magnesium supplement.
Okay. If your goal is to sleep or to
relax, magnesium glycinate is a
phenomenal choice. But if you're
constipated, that's not going to do
anything. So, don't don't do that. Uh,
for constipation, magnesium oxide is the
one that I would typically go with, but
there's also magnesium sulfate,
magnesium citrate. Those are the
choices.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. And if you get to a Bristol 7,
which is just
>> like diarrhea or something,
>> that's just Yeah. It's just liquid. um
you're not in a good place. And so
obviously that needs to be addressed as
well. And be aware of what we talked
about earlier, which is that there are
some people who suffer from chronic
constipation and then they start having
diarrhea and actually that's overflow.
>> Dr. Will, what's the most important
thing we haven't talked about as it
relates to all that is in your new book
um that you think we should have talked
about? I mean, we've probably covered a
tiny tiny tiny fraction of all the
things in there, but it gives people a
flavor. Is there one other thing that
you think is the most important thing
that we haven't talked about?
>> Here's what I really feel compelled to
say to be totally honest with you.
You're holding the book. The book is
called Plantpowered Plus. I don't want
people to be intimidated by the title of
my book. Let me explain this. I believe
that there are many paths to healing.
There are many different dietary
patterns. The one that's going to work
the best for you is the one that you're
actually willing to do. Right? So, this
book is not about a one-sizefits-all
approach, nor is it 100% plants. That's
not what the book is about. So, instead,
the conversation and what we haven't
discussed is what's missing in our diet
that we really need. And we've kind of
started to touch on this. I've
identified four things. And these four
things you find in all of the healthy
dietary patterns. So whether it's
Mediterranean, pescatarian, flexitarian,
if you do it right, you're going to have
these four things. Number one, fiber.
Number two, polyphenols.
Number three, healthy fat.
>> So healthy fat is the extra virgin olive
oil. Healthy fat is this avocado right
here. Healthy fat are these seeds and
nuts right here. Okay? They all have
healthy fat. and and in whole form, you
should consume these whole form foods
without restriction. If you are obese
and you're trying to lose weight, the
problem with any oil, not just not just
seed oils, also including extravirgin
olive oil, is that this is the highest
calorie thing that exists on the entire
planet. You cannot create something with
a higher calorie content than oil.
So, it's not to your advantage to really
focus on oil. If anything, you should be
limiting your oil intake. But these
healthy fats, the monounsaturated fats
that you get from nuts, from avocado, if
we had fish like a salmon or shellfish,
the omega-3s that you get from those
things, there's tremendous benefit to
those healthy fats.
>> That was the third one.
>> And then the fourth is fermented food.
>> Okay, which
>> so which we don't actually see. We kind
of see here we got the pickles. All
right, we got some pickles here. Um, but
the thing about fermented food is most
of us are not eating fermented food. So,
the average intake of fermented food in
the United States is zero. And if any,
maybe once in a while, yogurt. That's
it. We have tons of choices that are
available to us. And the key that people
need to know is a Stanford study done by
some of my friends Christopher Gardner
and um Justin and Erica Sonnenberg.
And what they showed is that in just
eight weeks by adding fermented food to
their diet, people could increase the
diversity of their gut microbiome.
That means a healthier gut. And they
lowered inflammation. So as the gut gets
healthier, inflammation goes down. And
they did that just by adding fermented
food. So Steve, the these four things,
fiber, 95% of Americans are deficient.
Polyphenols, almost no one is getting
the recommended amount of fruits and
vegetables. Healthy fats, we're not
opting for the types of fats that we're
talking about right now. I want people
to get more omega-3s and more
monounsaturated fat. And finally,
fermented food. No one's really
consuming. If you think about your diet,
this shouldn't be an exercise in more of
the thing that you already have. this
should be an exercise of what is the
thing that's missing that we could add
that could transform our health because
that's the real opportunity. So that's
what the nutrition program is about.
>> When I look at these uh this photo of
you before and after I think this one's
probably sort of during med medical
school was it or just after medical
school?
>> No. So I was actually that's in my early
30s on the left.
>> Yeah.
>> And then this photo here which I'll put
up on the screen is you at what age?
>> Yeah. About 40.
>> Okay. Well, 10 years has passed and you
look 10 years younger.
>> Yeah.
>> And you look pretty ripped.
>> What changed in your life between these
two photos? What what was different in
one's mind? Knowledge, mentality,
psychology. What was different?
So the the easy answer is I changed my
diet. I changed my lifestyle. I grew up
eating junk food. I grew up eating fast
food. We celebrated that sort of diet
and I shifted towards eating the way
that I'm describing to you today, right?
I obviously started going to the gym and
working out. I think everyone should be
going to the gym and working out. I
don't think that's to be underestimated.
That's an important part of the program
that I'm proposing for people, right?
So, there's those things, but the part
that you don't get on the surface that I
don't really talk about that much is I
also need to heal on the inside. So, I
was in a dark place and I wasn't in a
dark place just because of my diet.
There were issues that existed within
our family. I had issues with my dad
and I needed to resolve those. And what
happened, a few things. One, literally
an angel came into my life. That's my
wife, right? She came into my life in 20
in 2012.
And she never pushed anything on me. But
just seeing her and having her as a
presence in my life was what I really
needed to change myself in terms of my
diet, in terms of my lifestyle, but also
to pick up the phone and call my dad who
I hadn't talked to in 10 years. You'd
fallen out.
>> Totally fallen out.
And there's an entire story that goes
into that. and I have to own my own
mistakes because I'm as guilty as anyone
for the issues that existed between us.
But I picked up the phone and I called
him. And you the other thing that
happened in my life that really changed
everything was the birth of my daughter.
So my oldest I have four kids. My oldest
is now 11.
And when you hold that child in your
hands,
you're a different person instantly. And
I can't describe this to a person to to
someone who's never experienced this,
but you have a purpose that you didn't
have prior to that day. You've
experienced love that you never
understood. And the love that I had for
my daughter
helped me to understand the love that my
own dad had for me. But I could never
accept that.
And so the complexity of it all is yes,
I changed my diet, my lifestyle. Yes, I
started working out. But I also needed
to forgive my dad for the things that
happened when I was a kid.
And reconnecting with my dad was
actually one of the most important and
powerful things that happened for me.
>> He was vacant. He was absent. Or was it
something?
>> No. My when I So this is something that
um chapter 8 of my new book to me is my
masterpiece.
Um, of all the chapters, this is my
third book. Of all the chapters I've
written, it's the one that I'm most
proud of by far.
And if you if people get the audio book,
they're going to hear it in my voice.
So, there were some things that I needed
to talk about, and you'll find them in
that chapter. And basically the story is
that our family we went through a really
hard time and um my parents got divorced
and I was seven and I was the oldest of
three boys. It was not a nice divorce.
And when that happens,
you feel like you have to choose a side.
And
from my perspective, again, like, you
know, I was a kid, but
there was a part of me that
said,
"Dad,
you're a man.
Why did you allow this to happen?
Why did you allow this to happen to our
family? Why didn't you fix this?
And eventually I stopped talking to him.
And that was around the time that I
graduated from college.
And so for 10 years, I
was uh like I went to medical school at
Georgetown. I went to Northwestern. I
was the chief medical resident there. I
won the highest award in my residency
class. I was fully accomplished. I was
like accomplishing everything.
Um I was very very sad inside. And what
was missing was my dad and I needed him
there. And so having my daughter
and feeling uh the love that I felt
instantly for my daughter helped me to
understand the love that my dad had for
me. And ultimately what I realized,
Steve, is that cuz the thing you have to
know that's hard to explain in short
order is that
we had I had two brothers. My dad used
to take us camping. Three boys, no one
else, just him.
He'd take us camping all the time. He
took us to on vacation all the time. If
there was a sporting event, he was
always there, right? But I wasn't able
to see that all that was really an act
of love.
And now having kids myself and
understanding how hard it is to be a
parent and raise these kids, the idea of
taking three boys camping by yourself is
insane to me. I now understand how hard
my dad was trying.
And in your book published in um 2020, I
believed 2020. You you wrote this thing.
Could you read that in your own voice?
Cuz I was going to read it, but it's
very personal.
>> You wrote this in the front of the book.
>> Yeah. I lost my dad during the
preparation of this book. It was sudden
and completely unexpected.
I couldn't wait to share this book with
him. It would have been easy to just
send an electric electronic copy, but I
really wanted his first read to be a
physical book with the hard cover, all
the pages, and his son's name on the
front.
Over the past few months, my dad
repeatedly told me how proud he was of
me. He told me that my grandparents,
John and Helen Bolawitz, would have been
so proud of the work I was doing in the
name of our family.
I can't tell you how much it means to me
that he said all that.
It breaks my heart that he's not here
anymore.
I am who I am because of him.
But I will forever be grateful for the
special times that we shared.
Love you, Dad.
We'll always be thinking of you.
This book is for you.
You know, we're all susceptible for
letting a relationship sour and then
losing a lot of time. And I think that's
why your story is so inspiring because
it reminds us that I guess what matters
most in the end. And sometimes we can
lose, I don't know, decades, years
because of grudges or because of
misunderstandings that have never been
addressed. So, I mean, it's a huge
compliment to your wife that she had the
wherewithal to to try and get you guys
to reconnect so that you could reform
that relationship before he did pass
away. And I'm no doubt that he was would
be incredibly proud if he's if he was uh
watching over us now and had seen what's
happened in the in the last 5 years in
your life because it's been incredible.
Absolutely incredible. Healing comes in
many forms
and sometimes it's the changes that we
make to our diet
and sometimes it's the changes we make
in our relationships with other people.
>> There's different opportunities. You and
I talked about like what is the thing
for every person is something different.
And it's funny how they're both
extrically linked because when one gets
right with themselves and others, they
often find it much easier to get control
of their diet and their lifestyle
>> and then it all clicks.
>> I highly recommend everybody goes and
gets this book. It's um it's going to be
published in the US here on the 13th of
January and in the UK on the 15th.
>> That's right. Yeah. Tuesday in the US,
Thursday in the UK.
>> So, I'm going to link it below. Um we
just touched on a fraction of it. We
haven't gone into much of the details,
but if you are someone that is
struggling with your gut, you know, one
of the 61% or 70% of people that told me
ahead of this conversation that you
were, I highly recommend this book
because it's incredibly accessible in
the way that it's written, but also it's
incredibly comprehensive and up to date
and as you said, the science on the gut
and all of the related gut related sort
of issues and symptoms that we have is
always evolving. So I I love having
these conversations as almost refreshes
and updates to me because every single
time I learn something new and I get
more of the sort of jigsaw puzzle of my
gut health and as it relates to like my
brain and my immune system filled in and
it's having it's really remarkable how
much of a real world impact these
conversations have had on me. I don't
think people know this enough but they
often ask me like which conversations
had an impact on you. The way that I
view it is it's almost it is like a
jigsaw puzzle. And each conversation is
adding a piece. And I can see since we
had that last conversation about poop
and the gut and the microbiome and all
those things, there's been radical
changes I've made to my life that have
had a radical impact. It's like the
lights have been turned on. And that's a
really good example of what this book
does when you read it. It turns on the
lights. So, highly recommend people go
check it out. You are launching a
YouTube channel, you said.
>> Yeah, I'm launching a I'm launching a
YouTube channel. It's um the gut health
MD and that's also my social hashtag my
social handle. So you can find me on
those locations, but my home base is my
website, the gotalthmd.com. And if you
come there, I highly encourage people to
register for my email newsletter because
it's a completely free resource,
basically a Substack for free
>> that's designed, this is where I love to
like really have these conversations
with people about, hey, there's this new
study, let's talk about it. Hey, there's
this thing that I'm seeing, let's talk
about it, right? Hey, this is what I'm
doing right now.
>> Right? So, it's it's an opportunity for
sharing that goes beyond like the
limitations of social.
>> I'll link all of that below, everything
we've mentioned in the last 30 seconds,
so everyone can check you out. We do
have a closing tradition where the last
guest leaves a question for the next.
And the question that has been left for
you is, what is one thing you could do
today to help rectify your life's
biggest regret? [laughter]
Isn't that funny?
Um,
well, I think that the good news, this
is to me, uh, if anything, a story of of
hope and optimism because
on many levels I did.
>> Um, so reconnecting with my dad was key.
But I think that the other piece is when
you when you lose a person the way that
we lost my dad, he's gone, right? And it
happened real fast and I didn't get to
say goodbye.
I will say it's my faith that allows me
to know like not to pretend to know to
actually know that these things that I
need to say to him that I never actually
got a chance to say that I wish I did.
I'll have a chance to do that
>> and I look forward to the day when I see
him again.
What would you say?
>> I would tell him that
I hate the fact that it took me so long
to figure out that he was a great dad.
And
you know, adults may have conflict.
That's what the divorce was.
But he was a phenomenal dad. And I
didn't see that or get that until I had
my own kids.
Dr. Bill, thank you.
[music]
>> [music]